.TH MSEEDSYNCDB 1 2013/01/14
.SH NAME
Synchronize Mini-SEED with database schema

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
mseedsyncdb [options] file1 [file2 file3 ...]

.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmseedsyncdb\fP reads Mini-SEED, determines contiguous time series
represented and synchronizes the information with a database.

A segment is considered contiguous if it forms a continuous series in
time and in order of records in a given file.  The location of a given
segment is represented in the database as starting at a byte offset in
a file and a count of bytes that follow.  Each segment of data is a
row in the schema.

Data files should be scanned or synchornized when they are in-place.
The location of the file will be stored for extraction of the data
later.

Any existing rows in the database that match the file being
synchronized will be replaced during synchronization.  This operation
is done as a database transaction containing all deletions and all
insertions.  See \fBFILE VERSIONING\fP for a description of how to
avoid race conditions while simultaneously updating archive files and
extracting data.

When a input file is full SEED including both SEED headers and data
records all of the headers will be skipped.

.SH FILE VERSIONING
During synchronization, all existing rows associated with the file
being scanned will be deleted and new rows representing the current
file will be inserted, effectively replacing all rows for a given file.

This situation leads to a timing issues if data file
replacement/synchronization and data extraction are occuring at the
same time.  To avoid this race condition \fBmseedsyncdb\fP supports
the following:

1) all deletions of existing rows and insertions of rows for a given
file are performed in a transaction, meaning that the operation is
atomic and no database reader can see a mix of rows from both files.

2) \fBmseedsyncdb\fP recognizes file versions as numbers appended to a
file name following a \fB#\fP character, with this pattern:

.nf
/path/to/archive.file#VERSION
.fi

If a file name contains this version information \fBmseedsyncdb\fP
will search for existing rows in the database that match everything
but the version, e.g. \fB/path/to/archive.file*\fP or \fBfilename like
/path/to/archive.file%\fP in SQL.

These features combined mean that an archive file can be "replaced" by
creating a new version of the file and scanning it without ever
interrupting concurrent data extraction.  After replacement another
process can later remove the older version of the file.

Once consequence is that no file names should contain a \fB#\fP
character other than to desginate a file version.

.SH SEGMENT UPDATE TIME
The schema contains fields for storing a hash (MD5) and update time of
the data records containing a given segment.  When updating existing
rows the \fBupdated\fP field will only be changed when the hash does not
match the existing row.  This facilitates tracking of time series
updates even when archive files are replaced but contain the same
segments.

The time that the row was last updated is tracked independently in the
\fBscanned\fP field.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "-V         "
Print program version and exit.

.IP "-h         "
Print program usage and exit.

.IP "-v         "
Be more verbose.  This flag can be used multiple times ("-v -v" or
"-vv") for more verbosity.

.IP "-ns        "
No synchronization.  Read miniSEED, determine data representation but
do not synchronize the time series information with the database.
Typically this would be used during diagnostics or testing and in
combination the verbose option to print the time series information.

.IP "-C \fIconninfo\fP"
Specify the database connection information parameters.  For example:
.nf
"host=postdb dbname=timeseries user=timeseries"
.fi

.IP "-tt \fIsecs\fP"
Specify a time tolerance for constructing continous trace
segments. The tolerance is specified in seconds.  The default
tolerance is 1/2 of the sample period.

.IP "-rt \fIdiff\fP"
Specify a sample rate tolerance for constructing continous trace
segments. The tolerance is specified as the difference between two
sampling rates.  The default tolerance is tested as: (abs(1-sr1/sr2) <
0.0001).

.SH "INPUT LIST FILE"
A list file can be used to specify input files, one file per line.
The initial '@' character indicating a list file is not considered
part of the file name.  As an example, if the following command line
option was used:

.nf
\fB@files.list\fP
.fi

The 'files.list' file might look like this:

.nf
data/day1.mseed
data/day2.mseed
data/day3.mseed
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Chad Trabant
IRIS Data Management Center
.fi
